## Geeks, Mops, and Sociopaths (Discussion & Analysis)
[Link to asset](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=TAHsLFW0tzM)

### Summary

David discusses David Chapman's blog post "Geeks, Mops, and Sociopaths in Subculture Evolution." Chapman examines how subcultures, often related to music, art, or technology, evolve through three stages: the initial phase where passionate "Geeks" create and drive new ideas, the phase where less intense "Mops" join and dilute the original culture, and finally the phase where "Sociopaths" exploit social capital for personal gain. Chapman's analysis suggests this progression can lead to the decline of the original scene's essence. David agrees with some of Chapman's views but points out the complexities of implementing proposed defenses, like maintaining an ideal ratio of geeks to mops or adopting sociopathic tactics for good.

### Full Transcript (whisper)

 Hey everybody, this is David. This video is going to be a breakdown of something community relevant. This video isn't really intended to be watched as is, but it's intended to be grist for the mill. So I want to talk about David Chapman's blog post on the meaningless blog called Geeks, Mops, and Sociopaths in subculture evolution. This was a very influential article on me because what he's talking about is typically like music or art scenes where there's some cool attached to it. And what he's describing in this post is basically the breathing in and breathing out or the creation and destruction of scenes around cool things over time. And I thought that was really fascinating. So what I'm going to do in this video is kind of comment on what's in here, break it down, and provide some of my own analysis on this. So basically what he talks about is Geeks. So basically in the stage of a subcommunity that he calls the birth of cool, he is talking about the creation of a small scene around some set of creators. And so this is akin to like when a technology business first gets started, you might have that engineer who first initiates the action and who creates the cool new thing. More broadly, this could be a musical genre or religious sect or film animation technique or a political theory. It could be anything. But basically like the way that you first create a scene is that you get a couple of people who are interested in something. And then everybody starts riffing off of everybody else. So when you do that and people get kind of excited by this new energy that they're finding, the scene draws fanatics. Fanatics are often big fans. So as he says, they don't really create anything new in the ecosystem, but they contribute energy. Creators and fanatics are both what David Chapman is referring to as Geeks. They love the new thing. They're and they really just want to engage with it. Now some scenes, a lot of scenes in fact, possibly the repository that I'm trying to create here is going to be so geeky that it basically remains just a niche geek thing. And so nobody else really wants to do it or participate in it. It's it's like a hobby, not a subculture. But if it gets really big and exciting, then basically the scene starts to attract another persona that David Chapman calls mobs. And this is really funny. I have a hard time picturing mobs other than like mop top, you know, bad haircut or something like that. But but basically like when the scene attracts enough gravity, people show up who are fans, but they're not really rabid fans. They don't really want to contribute. They're just kind of to vibe to participate, right? And so when we think about, for example, an open source community, these are not people who are contributing code, but they're people who are using the code. They enjoy it. They like seeing the community interaction, but they're typically on the sidelines and not really saying much. And at first in a subcultures evolution, geeks really welcome mobs because it's this validating kind of feeling. So the geeks know that they're onto something cool and the influx of mobs basically is proof. So basically, you know, the more mobs show up, the more we know our cool thing is really exciting and cool. Fanatics contribute much more per head than mobs, but they're usually fear enough that it's really possible for creatives to go full time with with support only from fanatics. So basically, this is about how you're starting to scale the community. You're going to scale it with people who are less convicted, less committed, but who are still basically in. Now, the next phase he then describes is what he calls the mop invasion. And as the number of mobs starts to really swell, they become a headache for the scene. They might ask a lot of questions. They might need a lot of support. The geeks might put on events and do a lot of things to take care of this community, but the mobs just kind of soak it up. They don't necessarily participate. Mobs deluding the culture is a big point here too. Okay, so in a typical startup company, one of the very common patterns that you see within the technology company is that there's a hardcore of engineers that got hired early on and they had a particular culture, particular attitude about them. And when you go through the rapid growth phase, you have a lot of people who didn't natively come from that scene or culture. And so the fact that so many of them all flood in basically dilutes the perception of the new thing because there aren't enough geeks around to accurately represent the essence of what that thing was. So mobs relate to each other in normal ways. So basically they're just regular people. But the weird part is that in some subcultures, the truth fanatics find this abhorrent, where they find it repellent. So you know, not as a teenager, I was a part of the hardcore music and hardcore punk scene. And here too, you would see that kind of dynamic where they're the people who were totally bought into the scene and then people who showed up afterwards. They were sometimes hostile towards people who just wanted to enjoy the music. Now, if you're a mop, that's going to come across as looking very elitist. And if you're a geek, it's part of gate keeping your culture, if you will. So when, you know, during the middle of the show, geeks want to talk about the new things, but mobs are having a much more ordinary conversation like what they might be doing at work on Monday. So there starts to be this dynamic that can sometimes evolve in communities where mobs seem to the geeks to be increasingly entitled and they seem to treat the fanatics as service workers. I personally think that David Chapman here is making a mistake. He's representing it too much from the geek's perspective. Okay, the geeks often do feel that way with respect to mobs. But I think that that's a misread. I think the mobs are fundamentally less bought in, but they're still enthusiasts and they don't mean in any way to extract resources or treat the fanatics as service workers. They just mean to engage with the content in the way that's natural and meaningful to them. They weren't at the birth of the scene. And so they lack some cultural context for how the scene started up, but that doesn't make them in any way bad. They're just starting from a different starting point. So the third stage is the sociopath invasion. Okay, so the key thing to important here, the key thing to understand here is that when a subculture is established and grows, it creates lots of social capital. It throws it off all over the place. By social capital, we mean people who have influenced by nature of their reputation. You can see this in literally any community. A community will contain, you know, a small handful of figureheads who have status. In the open source world, we would call these benevolent dictators for life. In other communities, you would just refer to them as leaders. So communities tend to create a lot of these people and throw off extra social capital. So basically, if a community becomes popular and powerful enough, a third group of people rushes in to exploit that. They want to be popular. They want to direct the money and the attention of the community. So they might show up and they might try to ingratiate themselves with the key creators. The thing about sociopaths, at least in David Chapman's telling, is that they talk just like creators, but a little bit smoother because, you know, their motivations are not coming from this geeky passion. It's coming from a facile nature with social relationships or a desire to worm their way into the center of a group. Now in Chapman's telling, mobs get fooled every single time. They don't really care much about the details and so the sociopaths look like creators only better. So basically, in sort of a cult style, and I mean, you'll see this a lot in Chapman's work is he will use certain phrases like this was a cult or something. Okay, if we're dealing with the subculture here, the sociopaths have their choice of the best looking mobs to sleep with because that just shows how much they are trusted. Obviously, that would not occur in a technical community or a community around a company, but the fact remains that if a community gets big enough and popular enough, it will be attractive to people who want that resource command or who want that social status. Sociopaths also work out how to monetize mobs. You know, in open source communities, a lot of times there's a lot of worry about marketing associated with companies and people have this instinctive fear of being monetized. And I mean, who might have told them that they're wrong because that's happened a bunch of times. I mean, Chapman is pointing out here how it's part of, you know, the ebb and flow of the subculture over time. Sociopaths might figure out how to use your engagement with the community as a way to turn a book. And that doesn't feel good to anybody. Sometimes, some of the money might go to the project, but somehow most of it seems to go to the sociopaths. And so if you see a pattern like that in a community, that's what Chapman is talking about. He's talking about a sociopath invasion that has figured out how to monetize the mobs for the sociopaths game. So at this stage, Chapman basically posits that the entire scene is going to call it fall apart, and all of the cool is going to die and drain out of this community. It might have gotten diluted into a light beer version of the scene. And it might have left behind the wreckage of devastated geeks who still have no idea what happened to their wonderful new thing and the friendships they formed around it. At this point, he kind of pivots into some of the defenses that a scene might adopt against this wave of mob invasion followed by sociopath exploitation. Some of the creators of the scene might be geniuses. So what can they do? What can they do? The first thing, I think this is very interesting. He calls out that even wondering what you can do is a very geek question to ask. Okay, if you're a mob, you're not really that attached. You want the good thing, but you're not into community building. So you are not even going to ask this question. And you're definitely not going to ask the question about how to protect against sociopaths if you are a sociopath. Basically, what they want is an easily exploited pool of prestige, sex, money, and power. So from a utilitarian point, okay, you got this problem like mobs usually outnumber the geeks. So what can you do? Well, point one is the geeks could refuse to admit mobs. You could basically keep it kind of like a hipster type of community or what other people would call hipsters. Now the hipsters, on the other hand, tend to look at the mobs as posers. You can basically keep all of the mobs out and that keeps the subculture comfortable for geeks, but it also severely limits its potential. So the geeks want to see their thing grow. They know how cool their scene is and how cool whatever it is that they have is. And they want to share it with other people. So typically, this tends not to be a very good approach to keep it very insular and very hipster. Chapman suggests that he thinks that the optimal mop to geek ratio is 6 to 1. And that would mean that, okay, basically these people are contributing a lot of energy to your scene, but there's not enough of them to sap your resources in terms of the support overhead that mobs might require. The other thing is that sociopaths are only going to show up when there's enough people to exploit. So if you keep the mop to geek ratio 6 to 1, he doesn't really have any concrete suggestions on how you would do that. But if you kept that ratio that way, there wouldn't be enough people to exploit and sociopaths would never show up. Now another thing that you could do is you could recognize the sociopaths and eject them. Now in open source communities, we typically have things like codes of conduct and this is where they come in. So you write down a code of conduct to establish a kind of yardstick for what kind of behavior is acceptable and not. And then you should in theory have a community organizer who evaluates people's behavior and then throws them the hell out if they're not behaving according to the code of conduct. Mobs tend not to recognize sociopaths because remember they're kind of the sheep that are getting eaten by the wolves at least in David Chapman's formulation, not necessarily in my own. I'm saying that these ideas were influential to me, but I don't agree with all of them. The trouble is that the geeks tend to be very bad at establishing and holding boundaries. So they can frequently see when behavior is over the line, but they are not necessarily that good at enforcing it. And here too, we've seen this in many communities. There's somebody whose behavior is clearly overaligned beyond the code of conduct, but people in the community can get very disappointed with community organizers when they don't hold boundaries and force people out. Holding those boundaries, as we might know from our personal lives, is a whole lot harder than identifying when they've been crossed. This is a really hard human problem that I don't think is going away anytime. So you could have a code of conduct and you could enforce it. That's only a good plan if you have a good enforcer in your midst. If you're basically hoping for very soft, open people to become good at hard-nosed enforcing, that might not be the best plan. Still, we do need codes of conduct and we need people who can try to enforce them. He also makes this point of geeks need sociopaths. Basically, he might feel that geeks basically need the marketing that comes from lots of mobs and sociopaths. And so there's this push and pull in geeks' psychology between wanting to keep your thing insular and making sure that it doesn't get diluted, polluted, whatever word you want to pick. And then on the other hand, wanting it to be popular and wanting to share the goodness of your community with lots and lots of people. But not to the degree of mop invasion or sociopathic exploitation. That is quite a trick to pull off and I think that it neatly encapsulates a very important idea about the culture or the vibe of communities in general. So he suggests basically being slightly evil. So Chapman's solution to all of this is to adopt a fluid mode where geeks need to learn and use some of the sociopaths' tricks. This is quite a trick. So if you have geeks or leaders in your community who are extremely socially adept and think deeply about these topics, perhaps they could study Chapman's ideas here and could take some of that on board. But this strikes me as a really difficult thing for people to do because it requires somebody who's not a sociopath to get inside the heads of people who are trying to exploit others and then to adopt some of their tactics. But somehow to take those tactics and then to reapply them for good. I mean, you could see how this could easily go wrong. Either the geek just doesn't get the sociopathic techniques or worse, what if they do? What if they get them too well? Well, haven't you just made another sociopath? Slightly evil defensive subculture requires realism. Letting go of eternalist hope and faith and imaginary guarantees that the new thing will triumph. Now that right there is kind of like the death of optimism for some geeks. Such realism is a characteristic of nihilism. Nihilism has its own delusions, though, as well. And so what Chapman is talking here is he's ultimately advocating a bit of a fluid mode where a person's mentality can go back and forth between all of these different settings and that that would be the optimal place for a community to be. I kind of agree with him. I mean, I think he's got an excellent point here, but I also think that what he's laying out is a hell of a trick for a normal person to pull off. And it suggests like many years spent in cultivating one's self psychologically before you would have the tool set necessary to do what he's asking to do. So anyway, thanks for your attention. That is my summary of Geeks Mobs and sociopaths by David Chapman.
    